Philippians 2:3:
“With humility consider others superior to you.”
These words, penned by the apostle Paul,
really reflect a message that Jesus
tried again and again
to get across to his apostles.
In fact, let’s look
at one account at Mark 10:42, 43
—Mark 10:42.
It says: “But Jesus
called them to him and said to them:
“‘You know that those who appear
to be ruling the nations lord it over them
“‘and their great ones
wield authority over them.
“‘This must not be the way among you;
“‘but whoever wants to be great among you
must be your minister.’”
“With humility consider others superior to you.”
Now, why was Jesus so concerned
that his disciples learn this lesson of humility?
Because Jesus knew that a lack of humility
is contrary to Jehovah’s personality.
If we don’t have humility,
Jehovah’s holy spirit cannot flow.
Psalm 138:6 says that Jehovah
only knows the haughty “from a distance.”
But Jesus also knew that lack of humility
disrupts the peace of God’s people.
And without peace,
Jehovah’s spirit cannot flow either.
We may think of 1 Corinthians 14:33
that says that Jehovah “is a God . . . of peace.”
Now, it’s of interest as we look at the accounts
that Jesus recognized
that when his disciples lost their peace
—when they were arguing,
when they were bickering among themselves—
it was because they were not applying
the principle in today’s text.
Let’s look at another account.
If you look back a page to Mark 9:33,
it says: “And they came into Capernaum.
“Now when he was inside the house,
he put the question to them:
‘What were you arguing about on the road?’”
“What were you arguing about?”
Well, if you look at verse 34, they were quiet
because they were arguing
about who was greater.
Now, think about this:
These were grown men.
Do you really think
they were walking down the road saying,
‘Well, I’m greater than you are’;
‘no, I’m greater’; ‘no, I’m the greatest there is’?
Maybe, but maybe not.
These were grown, mature men.
But Jesus, in his wisdom of human nature
and being able to read hearts,
knew what they were arguing about
—the root of it.
The topic didn’t matter.
The real issue was that it was a lack of humility.
And notice what he says in verse 35.
It says: “So he sat down
and called the Twelve and said to them:
“‘If anyone wants to be first,
he must be last of all and minister of all.’”
Have humility.
Consider others superior to you.
At Luke 9:46, 47,
when there was a dispute, that account says
that “Jesus, knowing
the reasoning of their hearts,”
counseled them on humility.
He saw right through the argument
—right through the issue—
and isolated the real problem:
lack of humility.
Now, when you think about it,
isn’t it true that that’s usually what is
behind petty arguments, disputes,
or disagreements we may have?
See, if Jesus was among us, would he say:
‘Come over here.
What were you arguing about in the office?
What were you arguing about in the room?’
See, whether it’s between marriage mates,
those of us working together here at Bethel,
bodies of elders, publishers in the congregation,
what’s the lesson for us?
Well, the lesson is that
when there seems to be a lack of peace
or when there seems to be tension or arguing,
the first person we should look at is ourselves.
Am I really arguing over who is greater?
Now, an account that always comes
to mind when I think about this
is that of Hagar,
Sarah’s Egyptian maidservant.
And if you turn back to Genesis chapter 16,
(and we’re familiar with this account)
Sarah, or Sarai at the time,
was not able to become pregnant.
Hagar became pregnant,
and as soon as Hagar became pregnant,
peace went out of the family.
There was tension;
there was bickering; there was arguing.
Things escalated to the point
of Sarai humiliating Hagar
and chasing her away into the wilderness.
We may first read this and say:
‘Oh, poor Hagar, this young pregnant girl.
Sarai is just jealous.
Sarai has got the problem.’
Was that the case?
Well, we don’t have all the facts of the matter,
but it is of interest to note what Jehovah,
through his angel, told Hagar
when he met up with her in the wilderness.
Look at Genesis 16:9.
It says: “Jehovah’s angel then said to her:
“‘Return to your mistress
and humble yourself under her hand.’”
‘Go back, and be humble;
and everything will be OK.’
Now, did you notice
what may have been the obstacle to peace?
Back in verse 4—
Chapter 16, verse 4 says
that Hagar “began to despise her mistress”
when she, Hagar,
found out that she was pregnant.
The Byington translation says
that Hagar began to ‘look down on her mistress.’
Hagar began to feel that she was superior.
And what happened?
Yes, Sarah chased her away.
Hagar reacted, and perhaps Sarah reacted.
Perhaps Sarah did not react well either.
But do you notice who Jehovah held responsible
for the lack of peace in the family?
Hagar.
‘You go back
and humble yourself under her hand.’
And see, that’s a good account
that reminds us that sometimes
the real underlying challenge
to peace may be me.
See, peace may have gone away
because of how people are reacting to me.
Perhaps I’m telegraphing
that I think my ways, my ideas,
my way of doing things
are superior to others.
Now, why is it so important
that we fight this imperfect tendency
that we all have toward pride,
toward lacking humility,
and feelings of superiority?
Well, not only is it distasteful to Jehovah but,
as we’ve talked about, lack of humility
disrupts the peace of God’s people.
And without peace, Jehovah’s spirit cannot flow.
Without Jehovah’s spirit, we’re on our own.
And if we’re on our own, we’re going to fail.
There’s a powerful quote
in the Kingdom Rules! book
on page 120 in paragraph 9.
In fact, we have it written
on one of the whiteboards in our office
just to remind us of this point.
It says this: “Any structure of order
“that does not have peace as its foundation
“will sooner or later collapse.
In contrast, godly peace
promotes the kind of order that lasts.”
Powerful point, isn’t it?
“Any structure of order
that does not have peace as its foundation
will sooner or later collapse.”
And see, that applies in the congregation,
in a family, in our department at Bethel,
on a construction site, wherever we are.
And I know in our work,
no matter how challenging
or how complicated things get,
no matter what we’re dealing with,
the only time we really start to worry
is when we find that peace has gone away.
Maybe there’s tension
between ones in the office;
maybe there’s tension between
our department and another department.
That’s when we worry,
and we start working quickly
to see what we can do to restore peace.
Because when peace is present—
No matter how challenging
or how hard the topic is, it’s just work.
And that’s why we’re here: We love to work.
But when peace is disturbed,
that’s when we’re in trouble.
Now, how important is it to Jehovah
that we consider others superior to us?
How important is it to Jehovah
that we maintain peace?
How does he feel about that?
Well, let’s look at a scripture at Psalm 35:27.
Psalm 35:27 says:
“But let those who take pleasure
in my righteousness shout joyfully;
“may they constantly say:
‘May Jehovah be magnified,
who takes pleasure
in the peace of his servant.’”
Jehovah takes pleasure
in the peace of his servants.
He takes pleasure
when he sees us working together
in unity and in peace,
and that takes humility.
So may we work hard
to always apply the principle in today’s text.
Consider others superior to us.
May we work hard
to maintain the peace
of all of us all around us,
and may Jehovah never have to say of us,
‘What were you arguing about on the road?’